Anime & Manga Explained

The anime/manga industry is a durable business that has survived past threats to its extraterritorial growth, and continues to confront challenges to this day. Before getting into detail about the expansion of this multi-organizational commerce, it is important to understand what anime and manga are. Manga, originating in Japan, are “comic books and graphic novels” (Otmazgin, 2014, p. 57) that read from right-to-left. Nissim Otmazgin cites Gilles Poitras (2008) in describing anime as “products of artistic interaction between Japanese, European and American cultures, combined with new printing and media technologies” (Otmazgin, 2014, p. 57). Typically, an artist composes a manga story first, and subsequently an animating organization adopts the work to bring it to life in a motion picture. Anime has a graphic design unique to Japan, as well as a character and story development style that Westerners often find uniquely attractive, especially when portrayed as an animation. Joshua Draper cites Susan J. Napier (2001) in stating “Japanese animation, when compared to Western animation, is not necessarily aimed at a younger audience. In fact, a number of anime typically feature complex stories that have a more mature audience in mind” (Draper, 2015, p. 8).

Anime Goes Global

The origin of anime actually has Western influence, as Japanese artists would study the work of American and European composers dating back to 1914 (Draper, 2015, p. 11). Anime first came to America in 1963 when artist Osamu Tezuka’s Tetsuwan Atomu was brought to NBC. This also began a challenge that would face the anime industry for decades to come, especially when aired on cable television. The title of Tezuka’s craft was changed to Astro Boy (Draper, 2015, p. 12). Globalization has affected the anime industry by altering key features of the communicative medium: such as the gender of characters; display of violence; other mature content; and translated dialogue. Children were originally the target audience of anime in the U.S., therefore censorship became a norm after its first airing on television. Social information processing (Cheney, Christensen, Zorn, & Ganesh, 2011, p. 373) theorists would argue that upon NBC’s successful—and censored—airing of Astro Boy, other companies viewed censorship as an essential attribute to anime production.

Another reason for censorship, even for anime geared toward adult audiences, was due to cultural differences. The United States televised companies did not want to air aspects of Japanese storylines that were not viewed favorably in the West, such as homoeroticism (Draper, 2015, p. 13). This is just one example of the United States fearing the potential second level effects (Cheney, Christensen, Zorn, & Ganesh, p. 377) of raw Japanese content being exposed to its society. However, this was a successful means of introducing anime to the western world. And as the fan base grew, so did the desire for uncensored content.

Anime had succeeded by growing vastly in popularity in the U.S. by the early 21st Century, and with this success came a new challenge. A subculture of fans began to grow throughout the nation, and they sought to help anime reach the masses even further. “These fans were willing to help translate the original Japanese anime into their native languages in a process called “fansubbing” in which unofficial subtitles were added to Japanese anime by devoted fans” (Draper, 2015, p. 15). Ironically, these fansubbers were not only posing a threat to the individuals who were paid to translate and subtitle the animes, but were also threatening the profits of the production studios and original artists by uploading the subtitled media onto the Internet for the world to view free of charge. Here, a diametric was introduced to the entirety of the anime culture that exists to this day: as anime grows in popularity, the eagerness of investors to make contributions declines because profits face greater risks.

“...the dynamic pace of anime correlates with the character of high-speed Internet and its
appeal to the so-called “Internet generation.” At the same time, since Internet-based
distribution is mainly classed as piracy, in the long term it preempts attempts by new
ompanies from (legally) marketing anime in the US and may eventually result in
anime’s decline” (Otmazgin, 2014, p. 63).

While the industry must find a way around the threatening technological advancement of the Internet, it certainly is still a global media giant. Tai Wei Lim, Wen Xin Lim, Xiaojuan Ping, and Hui-Yi Tseng cite Roblyn Simeon (2006) in relaying “At least from 2006, Japanese anime industry already makes up more than 60% of global output of cartoons” (Lim, Lim, Ping, & Tseng, 2016, p. 73). It is also important to note that anime is a popular visual entertainment commodity in countries other than Japan, the U.S., and European nations. “According to the Association of Japanese Animations, 60 member anime production companies now provide products in 112 countries, reaching some 87.2 percent of the world’s population” (Nagata, 2010, at large). Masashi Kishimoto, originator of the popular manga and anime—Naruto—recognizes that the success of his work is largely due to the extraterritorial nature of the anime community. The artist remarked in an interview with Andrea Towers: “...I must say that part of what made Naruto successful was the globalization of manga, and the fact that all over the world, fans can enjoy and read manga even though the reading order is different than what people are used to” (Kishimoto, 2015, at large). Additionally, the introduction of anime to the Internet also allows Western viewers to watch their favorite anime uncensored by corporate television studio giants, like NBC.

  The Future of the Anime Industry - A Rough Road Ahead
Anime has permanently influenced American animation companies. This is seen in the creation of “Americanized” animes such as Avatar: The Last Airbender. In fact, there is debate in the community as to whether or not an animated production must be created in Japan in order to be considered a true anime. Due to the growing challenge of profiting from anime, more artists are creating what is known to sell, and therefore there is a decline in originality in the industry (Draper, 2015, p. 33). However, there is hope for the anime industry, and its beacon is the Internet. Online companies such as Crunchyroll serve as “the netflix of anime”. For a small monthly fee subscribers can pull from a variety of anime and manga to view. Popular anime also have ties to video-gaming and action-figure industries (Otmazgin, 2014, p. 63). Anime has endured hard times since its inception into the global market, and has risen to be a top-tier visual communication medium. Contributors to the anime culture have used advancements in technology to overcome past obstacles, such as censorship, and have the opportunity to expand further by establishing a cyber pay-to-play community, giving stakeholders a reason to stay involved.