Book Review: Outliers
by Howard Newell
Introduction
Malcolm Gladwell is a New York Times staff
writer who has written several books and articles
challenging conventional wisdom. In his book
Outliers, Malcolm Gladwell (2008) examines
how people become successful, and challenges
the readers to rethink the stereotype that hard
work and brains lead to success. Gladwell uses
anecdotes, personal interviews, and studies to
challenge the notion that success is derived solely
from an individual’s merits, and argues that what
leads to success is the opportunities, experiences,
and culture a person has or is exposed to. He
breaks the book up into two sections with the first
section, “Opportunity,” focusing on opportunities
and environments that people had in order
to become successful, and the second section,
“Legacy,” uncovering how culture can have
long-lasting implications for a particular group’s
success. While Gladwell is able to provide plenty
of evidence to bolster his argument in the first
section regarding a person’s opportunities leading
to success, he struggles in the second section to
succinctly connect the anecdotes and studies to
successful outcomes, and oftentimes requires
the reader to make a leap of faith to reach the
conclusion that he provides.
Evaluation/Analysis
TIn Gladwell’s first section, “Opportunity,” he
states that success is comprised of a combination
of experience, opportunities, and a certain degree
of intelligence. But how much experience is
required in order to become successful? Gladwell
answers this by pointing to a study conducted by
K. Anders Ericsson at Berlin’s Academy of Music
(Ericsson, 2014) that found what separated expert
musicians from merely good musicians was that
the experts had logged around 10,000 hours of
practice, whereas the merely good musicians had
logged between 4,000 to 6,000 hours. Neurologist
Daniel Levitin echoes similar sentiments, saying
that “the emerging picture from such studies is
that ten thousand hours of practice is required to
achieve the level of…being a world-class expertin anything” (Gladwell, 2008, p. 40). Gladwell
further illustrates his point by chronicling
several notable people’s rise to success, such as
Bill Gates and The Beatles, and states they had
the opportunity and a conducive environment
available for them to achieve the critical 10,000-
hour mark in their respective fields to become
successful.
Gladwell then segues into his chapter on
intelligence, arguing that beyond a certain
threshold, simply having a high IQ is not a
guarantee of success. Rather, you simply have to
be smart enough in order to be successful. He
refers to a study conducted by Richard Lempert at
the University of Michigan (Lempert, Chambers,
& Adams, 2000) who compared minority law
students with lower academic scores to nonminority law students with higher academic
scores to see if academic ability translated into
real-world success. As Lempert discovered, “We
found that they were doing every bit as well. There
was no place we saw any serious discrepancy”
(Gladwell, 2008, p. 85).
At the end of the first section, Gladwell has
provided a compelling argument with supporting
evidence to suggest that highly successful people
are a product of their experience, environment,
and a certain amount of intelligence, and not
just their individual personalities or merits. In
the next section on legacy, Gladwell opens with
a narrative of a study that provides the reader
with the framework that a cultural legacy, even
originating from several hundred years ago, can
shape and impact a person’s success.
Gladwell begins delving into power-distance
relationships in the context of airline pilots and
crew. Power-distance is typically defined as a
culture’s acceptance of how power is distributed
among relationships between leaders and
subordinates. Low power-distance cultures are
accepting of less hierarchical relationships, and
high power-distance cultures typically accept a
more hierarchical relationship. Gladwell discusses
a Columbian airline crash that was caused by
hierarchical command structure between the pilot
and his aircrew, with the crew uncomfortable
at explicitly expressing concern over the pilot’s
decisions, and writes how Korean Airlines, with
a similar high power-distance culture, was able
to improve its dismal crash record by retraining
the airline crew to adopt a more Western, low
power-distance environment in the cockpit.
Unlike the first section’s chapters’ findings that
could be applied to a variety of settings, the
absence of studies examining power culture or
other anecdotal evidence from different work
environments is glaring. Gladwell’s polished
prose and logic in the previous chapters is now
reduced to an anemic, vague statement of “when
we understand how much culture and history
and the world outside of the individual matter
to professional success…we have a way to make
successes out of the unsuccessful” (Gladwell, 2008,
p. 220).
What does this really mean? Surely there are
successful international corporations with
employees in different countries who encounter
cultural differences that could impede success.
Does this mean that these corporations have had
to adopt a low power-distance culture in order
to achieve success, like the airlines he provides
as examples? Gladwell simply doesn’t explain
the validity of his assertion, leaving the reader
to assume that his assertion may be only valid
in airlines or other similar, fast-paced work
environments.
In the next chapter, Gladwell postulates the
stereotype of Asians being good at math could
have a basis in their culture of year-round, laborintensive rice farming. He uses proverbs and
historical anecdotes to argue that the concept of
constant, hard work has embedded itself into most
Asian cultures and that this translates into these
countries being noticeably better in mathematics,
because they’re more willing to work harder on
problems than their Western counterparts. But
this is a hard sell; using hand-picked proverbs
and different agricultural methods as evidence
that this is the cause of a country’s success in
math seems like an extreme extrapolation, and
seems jarring compared to the first section’s wellresearched chapters. Instead, the reader is left
to ponder the absence of studies in this chapter,
and to question whether Gladwell is providing a
gross oversimplification of why Asian countries
perform better in math than Western countries.
Conclusion
Ultimately, Gladwell provides a thoughtful
examination of success, and effectively argues
that what matters most to becoming successful
is a person’s experience and opportunities. His
concept that culture contributes to success
unfortunately lacks sufficient evidence and
appears to be based solely on personal observation
and opinion. However, the idea itself is intriguing
and could prompt future research examining
this particular relationship to help us better
understand how culture could have an impact in
obtaining success, and further our knowledge on
how to become successful. 